# 目视天文学（二）进阶——环境

Clear(er) Skies Ahead

如果你是一名深空观察者，那么本文可能对你有帮助。

译者注：本人使用的AOD数据网站是 <https://www.meteoblue.com/>
。如何寻找适合观星的日子？第一是无云，第二是无月或者月光小，第三是AOD。

 **要点提炼：**

  * 1.对于深空观察者来说，云并不是唯一的障碍。深空的观察者更喜欢无云和清脆的天空（以天文学家的专业术语来说是透明度）。
  * 2.雾霾会导致能见度降低，产生星光的消光。潮湿的空气通常很朦胧，但湿度本身不会引起霾，主要来源于人类活动与火山、沙尘暴等等。冷锋是深空观察者的最好朋友——它们会清除气溶胶，而进入的干燥空气会降低任何残留污染物的散射效率。
  * 3.在可见波长处，消光的主要原因是气溶胶和瑞利散射。消光程度还与光的波长相关。
  * 4.瑞利散射在高海拔地区会减少，但地球上其他地方都是一样的。 **气溶胶光学深度（AOD）是消光的唯一方面，其位置和时间会发生巨大变化，因此它是总体大气清晰度的最佳指标。 AOD越高，您的天空就会越模糊。**
  * 5. **AOD为0.05到0.1意味着深空爱好者渴望获得的晴朗天空。这是针对具有挑战性的深空物体（如马头星云）的夜晚。欧洲和美国东部的AOD值通常约为0.2，对于大多数深空作业来说仍然足够。但是，北美东部的夏季AOD通常会上升到0.3或0.4。星团仍然值得，但星云和星系缺乏细节。最朦胧的夜晚的AOD为0.5或更高，深空的观察者应选择其他地点或另一晚。**

  

 **译自：Sky & Telescope 08.08**

机器译文：

New websites take themystery out of planning yourdeep-sky observing sessions.

The Internet has revolutionized amateur astronomy. The ability to pore through
satellite imagery and forecasts on demand has made it much easier for
stargazers to select nights that are free of clouds. Long drives to remote
locales and high gas prices have only added emphasis on a correct go/no-go
call for the serious deep-sky observer.

互联网彻底改变了业余天文学。通过浏览卫星图像和按需预测的能力，观星者可以轻松选择无云的夜晚。到偏远地区的长途开车和高油价仅增加了对认真的深空观察员的正确通行要求。

But clouds aren't your only potential problem. Deep-sky observers prefer skies
that are both cloudless and crisp (transparent, in astronomer's jargon) to
maximize the contrast between faint objects and their surroundings.
Transparency, though, is challenging to plan for. National Weather Service
forecasts don't typically mention the severity or duration of contrast-robbing
haze.

但是，云并不是您唯一的潜在问题。深空的观察者更喜欢无云和清脆的天空（以天文学家的专业术语来说是透明的），以使微弱物体与其周围环境之间的对比度最大化。但是，透明性在规划方面具有挑战性。国家气象局的预报通常不会提及对比雾霾的严重程度或持续时间。

Stargazers haven't had the resources to reliably track and predict haze —
until now. Satellite data and sophisticated weather models have made this much
easier, and you can now plan your observing sessions using a few select
websites. But it also helps to understand the causes of poor transparency.

直到现在，观星者还没有足够的资源来可靠地跟踪和预测霾。卫星数据和复杂的天气模型使这变得容易得多，现在您可以使用一些精选的网站来计划观测时段。但这也有助于了解透明度不佳的原因。

## The Nature of the Beast

 **由于我觉得下面的AOD部分更重要，所以原文本部分内容已被折叠到文章尾部**

## Aerosol Optical Depth 气溶胶光学深度

Visibility is a good indication of atmospheric clarity, but it's not always
the proper measuring stick for deep-sky observers. Meteorologically speaking,
“visibility” quantifies horizontal transparency in the air closest to the
ground. If the aerosol concentration is higher aloft than near the surface (as
is typically the case with plumes from volcanoes and forest fires), the lower
levels of the atmosphere may be clear but the sky still appears murky.

能见度很好地表明了大气的清晰度，但它并不总是适合深空观察员使用。从气象学上讲，“能见度”量化了最接近地面的空气中的水平透明度。如果气溶胶的浓度高于地面附近的高度（如火山和森林大火产生的烟气的典型情况），则较低的大气层可能是清晰的，但天空仍显得模糊。

What astronomers care about is the total light extinction between the ground
and space. This varies depending how much air you're looking through. There's
less air in the way when you're looking at the zenith than when you're viewing
objects low in the sky, as shown below. So extinction is measured per unit air
mass — the column of air directly overhead.

天文学家关心的是地面与太空之间的总消光。视您所经过的空气量而定。观看天顶时，与观看天空低处的物体时相比，空气较少，如下所示。因此，消光是根据单位空气质量（直接在上方的空气柱）测量的。

Astronomers like to measure extinction in magnitudes per air mass, but
atmospheric scientists prefer optical depth. The two are closely related; just
multiply optical depth by 1.086 to find magnitudes per air mass.

天文学家喜欢以每气团的大小来测量消光，但大气科学家更喜欢光学深度。两者密切相关；只需将光学深度乘以1.086即可得出每气团的大小。

  

![](https://pic3.zhimg.com/v2-f4db74a3ac69607eaa670cfc3b24b221_720w.jpg?source=d16d100b)

  

向下降低，空气更多对于靠近地平线的天体，您必须通过的空气量会急剧增加。
即使在完美的条件下，大气层也会阻挡来自地平线以上10°的物体的一半以上的光线，而雾霾会严重加剧这种影响。

Regardless of how it's measured, extinction depends strongly on the wavelength
of the light. Shorter wavelengths, toward the blue end of the spectrum, are
absorbed and scattered much more strongly than longer (redder) wavelengths.
That's why the Moon often appears tinted red when it's on the horizon. Most
important for deepsky observers is the greenish 510-nanometer wavelength,
which is close to the peak sensitivity of human night vision and the ionized-
oxygen (O III) emissions of many nebulae.

不管如何测量，消光很大程度上取决于光的波长。朝向光谱蓝端的较短波长的吸收和散射比较长（红色）波长要强得多。这就是为什么月亮在地平线上时常会显示红色的原因。对于深空观察员来说，最重要的是绿色的510纳米波长，该波长接近人类夜视的峰值灵敏度和许多星云的电离氧（O
III）发射。

At visual wavelengths, the main causes of extinction are aerosols and Rayleigh
scattering (illustrated at right). Absorption by the upper atmosphere's ozone
layer also reduces starlight, but to a much smaller extent. Rayleigh
scattering decreases at high elevations but is otherwise the same everywhere
on Earth. Aerosol optical depth (AOD) is the only aspect of extinction that
varies dramatically by location and time, so it's the best indicator of
overall atmospheric clarity. The higher the AOD, the hazier your sky will
appear.

在可见波长处，消光的主要原因是气溶胶和瑞利散射（如右图所示）。高空臭氧层的吸收也减少了星光，但程度要小得多。瑞利散射在高海拔地区会减少，但地球上其他地方都是一样的。
**气溶胶光学深度（AOD）是消光的唯一方面，其位置和时间会发生巨大变化，因此它是总体大气清晰度的最佳指标。 AOD越高，您的天空就会越模糊。**

Satellites remotely measure the aerosol optical depth over much of North
America. The Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) instrument
on NASA's Terra satellite, for example, collects AOD data at 550 nm on a daily
basis.

卫星遥测北美大部分地区的气溶胶光学深度。例如，NASA的Terra卫星上的中等分辨率成像光谱仪（MODIS）每天收集550 nm处的AOD数据。

You can access these readings from IDEA, a collaboration of several US
agencies. Their website (idea.ssec .wisc.edu) features a detailed AOD reading
of the US and southern Canada that's updated once a day at around 18h
Universal Time. IDEA includes an in-depth tutorial on the Terra images, a
48-hour forecast of elevated AOD concentrations, and an archive dating back to
August 2003.

您可以从IDEA（美国多个机构的合作组织）中获取这些读数。他们的网站（idea.ssec
.wisc.edu）提供了有关美国和加拿大南部的详细AOD读数，并且每天在世界标准时间18h左右更新一次。
IDEA包括有关Terra图像的深入教程，AOD浓度升高的48小时预测以及可追溯到2003年8月的存档。

  

![](https://pic2.zhimg.com/v2-c63431ac1f588eb9be6541d32540e156_720w.jpg?source=d16d100b)

  

为什么蓝天是蓝色的，空气分子对光的影响不大。但是，大气层的深度超过50英里，在这个距离上，甚至会有很小的影响。
即使空气绝对纯净，空气分子的瑞利散射也会使星光熄灭。 散乱的阳光使白天的天空变成蓝色，而不是黑色。

Imagery from the Geostationary Satellite Server Aerosol and Smoke Program
(GASP) is updated every half hour between 12:45 and 21:45 UT. This site has
the added advantage of a looping feature to track the movement of air masses
with high AOD levels.

对地静止卫星服务器气溶胶和烟气计划（GASP）的图像在世界标准时间12:45至21:45之间每半小时更新一次。该站点具有循环功能的附加优点，可以跟踪具有较高AOD水平的空气团的运动。

So what should you look for as a stargazer? An AOD of 0.05 to 0.1 means the
crisp skies that deep-sky enthusiasts crave. This is the type of night to
target challenging deepsky objects like the Horsehead Nebula. AOD values over
Europe and the eastern US are usually about 0.2, which is still good enough
for most deep-sky work.

 **那么，您作为寻星者应该寻找什么？
AOD为0.05到0.1意味着深空爱好者渴望获得清脆的天空。这是针对具有挑战性的深空物体（如马头星云）的夜晚。欧洲和美国东部的AOD值通常约为0.2，对于大多数深空作业来说仍然足够。**

However, summertime AODs in eastern North America typically rise to 0.3 or
0.4. Clusters are still worthwhile, but nebulae and galaxies lack detail. The
haziest nights feature an AOD of 0.5 or greater, and deep-sky observers should
select either a different venue or another night.

**但是，北美东部的夏季AOD通常会上升到0.3或0.4。星团仍然值得，但星云和星系缺乏细节。最朦胧的夜晚的AOD为0.5或更高，深空的观察者应选择其他地点或另一晚。**

Satellite aerosol data can also help you determine the type of haze involved —
and whether you can get above it. Industrial haze presents itself as amorphous
regions of increased AOD values. Under certain circumstances, it's possible to
get above such a layer. In this case, AOD values will decrease along the spine
of a mountain chain.

卫星气溶胶数据还可以帮助您确定所涉及的霾的类型，以及是否可以超越它。工业雾度本身表现为AOD值增加的无定形区域。在某些情况下，可能会超过该层。在这种情况下，AOD值将沿着山脉的脊椎减小。

Forest-fire aerosols appear as narrower, well-defined streaks of very high
AOD. Smoke and dust can be carried thousands of miles by upper-level winds and
are usually concentrated much higher in the atmosphere than industrail
emissions. If distant forest fires are ruining your transparency, finding a
nearby mountaintop won't help much; it would be better to move away from the
trajectory of the smoke plume. If a strong cold front is about to pass
through, check satellite data to see whether forest-fire smoke is being
brought downwind to your location.

森林火灾气溶胶表现为窄的，清晰的，AOD很高的条纹。烟雾和灰尘可被高空风携带数千英里，通常其浓度要比工业轨道的排放高得多。如果远处的森林大火破坏了您的透明度，那么寻找附近的山顶并没有多大帮助；最好远离烟羽的轨迹。如果即将通过强冷锋，请检查卫星数据，以查看是否有顺风将林火带入您的位置。

Both MODIS and GASP measure AOD at 550 nm. Multiplying one of their values by
1.2 is a good approximation for aerosol extinction in magnitudes per air mass
for human night vision, which peaks around 510 nm. The extinction difference
between a crisp night (an AOD of 0.1) and a hazy one (0.5) is about a half
magnitude at the zenith, and becomes much stronger near the horizon. If you're
looking into the heart of Sagittarius from 40° north latitude, poor
transparency can easily dim the Milky Way by a full magnitude.

MODIS和GASP均在550 nm处测量AOD。 将其中一个值乘以1.2可以很好地逼近人类夜视的气溶胶消光度（单位空气质量），峰值约为510 nm。
在清爽的夜晚（AOD为0.1）和朦胧的夜晚（AOD为0.5）之间的消光差在顶点处约为一半，并且在地平线附近变得更强。
如果您要从北纬40°看人马座的心脏，透明度差会很容易使银河系完全变暗。

It's important to note that the difference in aerosol extinction between
locales is often much greater than any improvement in Rayleigh scattering
you'd gain with higher elevation. So a crisp night on the beach is better than
a hazy night in the mountains.

重要的是要注意，场所之间气溶胶消光的差异通常远大于在高海拔地区获得的瑞利散射的任何改善。因此，在海滩上度过一个清爽的夜晚比在山区度过一个朦胧的夜晚要好。

Haze is a double whammy for deep-sky observers near cities. Aerosols scatter
light pollution downward, increasing the sky's background glow at the same
time that they dim the objects that you want to observe. Astrophotographers
are also greatly affected by poor transparency under light-polluted
conditions, though they can compensate somewhat by boosting the contrast with
modern imaging software.

阴霾对城市附近的深空观察员是双重打击。气溶胶使光污染向下扩散，同时增加了天空的背景光，同时又使想要观察的物体变暗。尽管在通过光污染的情况下，天文摄影师会受到透明度差的影响，但他们可以通过使用现代成像软件提高对比度来进行一定程度的补偿。

  

![](https://pic2.zhimg.com/v2-d3d224e8fc1f693601b2b7a16a32857a_720w.jpg?source=d16d100b)

  

消光程度随目标物在地平线上方的高度和气溶胶光学深度而变化（0.0极佳，0.2中等，而0.4较差）。 AOD =
0.0时的残留消光是由于臭氧层中的瑞利散射和吸收引起的。 良好的透明性对于地平线附近的物体比在天顶附近的物体更为重要。

Deep-sky observers, especially those of us who commute long distances to dark
sites, need to pick and choose our nights carefully. We have long had access
to good weather forecasts, but judging transparency has been a crapshoot until
very recently. Fortunately, the Internet now has resources to help us decide
when it will be crisp and clear. Selecting the proper nights for stargazing
has become a lot less murky.

深空观察者，特别是我们那些通向黑暗地点的长距离观察者，需要精心挑选我们的夜晚。我们长期以来一直可以获得良好的天气预报，但是直到最近，判断透明度一直是个难题。幸运的是，Internet现在拥有资源来帮助我们确定何时将变得清晰明了。选择合适的夜晚观星已经变得不那么模糊了。

  

![](https://pic2.zhimg.com/v2-58bc11040bca0dfa2182c63ae8be104a_720w.jpg?source=d16d100b)

  

## 被折叠的部分：The Nature of the Beast——

Misconceptions abound regarding the nature of haze, so let's start with the
basics. Haze is a reduction in visibility caused by aerosols: microscopic
solid or liquid particles suspended in the atmosphere. These particles
diminish starlight both by absorbing it (smoke) and scattering it (fog).
Astronomers refer to the combination of absorption and scattering as
extinction.

关于雾霾的性质存在很多误解，所以让我们从基础开始。雾霾是由气溶胶引起的能见度降低：悬浮在大气中的微小固体或液体颗粒。这些粒子通过吸收（烟）和散射（雾）来减少星光。天文学家将吸收和散射的结合称为消光。

Humid air masses are often hazy, but humidity by itself does not cause haze.
Tropical islands like Tahiti and Hawaii, whose air is hot, humid, and clean,
often have sapphire blue skies. Instead, the primary source of poor visibility
is air pollution, both natural and artificial — and humidity greatly
exacerbates the effects of pollutants.

潮湿的空气通常很朦胧，但湿度本身不会引起霾。塔希提岛和夏威夷等热带岛屿的空气炎热，潮湿，洁净，蓝天。相反，能见度差的主要来源是自然和人为的空气污染，而湿度极大地加剧了污染物的影响。

Nature is rife with culprits for poor transparency. Volcanic eruptions and
forest fires generate ash and smoke aerosols that can be carried for thousands
of miles by upper-level winds. Dust storms in the Sahara and even Asia's Gobi
Desert occasionally compromise visibility over North America.

大自然充斥着透明度差的罪魁祸首。火山喷发和森林大火产生灰烬和烟雾气溶胶，高空风能将其带走数千英里。撒哈拉沙漠甚至亚洲的戈壁沙漠的沙尘暴偶尔都会影响到北美的能见度。

Most haze, though, is produced by human activities. The two main culprits are
nitrogen oxides (NOx) and sulfur dioxide (SO2). These gases are transparent,
but they react readily with water vapor and other chemicals to form aerosols
that have dire effects on atmospheric transparency.

但是，大多数霾是由人类活动造成的。罪魁祸首是氮氧化物（NOx）和二氧化硫（SO2）。这些气体是透明的，但它们很容易与水蒸气和其他化学物质发生反应，形成对大气透明性有严重影响的气溶胶。

Nitrogen oxides are responsible for dangerous groundlevel ozone and the
characteristic brown clouds of smog that form over many large cities — most
famously Los Angeles. About half of all NOx emissions come from motor
vehicles.

氮氧化物是造成危险的地面臭氧和许多大城市（最著名的洛杉矶）形成的特征性棕色烟雾的原因。所有NOx排放量中约有一半来自机动车。

In the Eastern US and southern Canada, the main culprit is sulfate haze, which
forms from sulfur dioxide. This typically appears as a milky, whitish cast to
an otherwiseclear sky and accounts for 50% to 75% of summertime extinction.
Roughly two-thirds of SO2 emissions in the US come from power plants,
especially older units in the Ohio and Tennessee River valleys that lack
“scrubbers” in their exhaust stacks.

在美国东部和加拿大南部，主要的罪魁祸首是由二氧化硫形成的硫酸盐雾。这通常表现为乳白色，偏白色的天空，原本晴朗的天空，占夏季灭绝的50％至75％。在美国，大约有三分之二的SO2排放来自发电厂，尤其是俄亥俄州和田纳西河流域的老式机组，它们的烟囱中缺乏“洗涤器”。

Sulfate particles soak up moisture, and in sultry, stagnant summertime air
masses, they can grow to sizes that are extremely effective at scattering
light. For this reason, cold fronts are a deep-sky observer's best friend.
They sweep away aerosols, and the incoming, drier air reduces the scattering
efficiency of any leftover pollutants.

硫酸盐颗粒吸收水分，在闷热，停滞的夏季空气质量中，它们可以生长到对散射光极为有效的尺寸。
**因此，冷锋是深空观察者的最好朋友。它们会清除气溶胶，而进入的干燥空气会降低任何残留污染物的散射效率。**

To See, or Not to See

Regardless of what's limiting your vista, the modern amateur astronomer has
tools that can make short-term forecasts of the sky's clarity. You'll find
links to all the websites I mention here at SkyandTelescope.com/haze.

不管是什么限制了您的视野，现代业余天文学家都拥有可以短期预测天空清晰度的工具。您可以在SkyandTelescope.com/haze上找到我在此提及的所有网站的链接。

  

![](https://pic3.zhimg.com/v2-c7b6cbf573bcfd258c4df36547e4d36d_720w.jpg?source=d16d100b)

  

在潮湿但干净的空气中，所有水都是蒸气形式的，如左图所示。 像其他大气中的气体一样，水蒸气分子比可见光的波长小得多，因此大部分光线直接围绕在它们周围。

硫酸盐颗粒是发电厂发来的二氧化硫的副产品，吸收了像海绵一样的水，并迅速成长为与可见光波长相当的尺寸，如中心框架所示。
光会散射掉水合的硫酸盐颗粒，就像撞撞的台球一样。

烟尘和烟雾颗粒比可见光波长大得多，因此它们吸收了光，使光停止在其轨道中。

Many regular stargazers are familiar with the Clear Sky Chart, which provides
transparency forecasts for thousands of locations across North America. The
underlying continent-wide forecast, generated by the Canadian Meteorological
Centre, is based on the vertical and horizontal distribution of water vapor in
the air. These forecasts explicitly ignore industrial and natural aerosols, so
caution is advised when using them in summertime or for locations downwind of
forest fires.

许多定期观星者都熟悉“晴空图”，该图提供了北美数千个地点的透明度预测。加拿大气象中心的基本预报是基于空气中水蒸气的垂直和水平分布的。这些预测明确忽略了工业和天然气溶胶，因此在夏季或森林大火顺风地区使用它们时，应谨慎行事。

In 2007 the National Environmental Modeling and Analysis Center (NEMAC)
introduced HazeCast. This website incorporates computer weather models and
emission source data to forecast visibility up to 5 days in advance for the US
and southern Canada.

2007年，国家环境建模与分析中心（NEMAC）引入了HazeCast。该网站结合了计算机天气模型和排放源数据，可以提前5天预测美国和加拿大南部的能见度。

The National Park Service has live webcams for selected locations. If your
favorite dark-sky site is reasonably close to one of them, you have a reality
check for your go/no-go call. Other sites with real-time webcams that can be
used to gauge sky transparency in eastern North America include the Midwest
Haze Cam and the CAM-NET site for the northeastern US.

国家公园管理局（National Park
Service）具有选定位置的实时网络摄像头。如果您最喜欢的黑暗天空站点与其中一个站点相当接近，那么您可以进行去/不去通话的现实检查。其他具有实时网络摄像头的站点可以用来评估北美东部地区的天空透明度，包括中西部的阴霾凸轮和美国东北部的CAM-
NET站点。

What comprises good visibility varies from location to location, as shown at
bottom left. The Intermountain states enjoy 100-mile visibility on a regular
basis. In the eastern US, visibility averages around 30 to 50 miles throughout
the year and about 20 to 40 miles during summer months. Visibility is
generally worst in the Ohio and Tennessee valleys and improves as you head
toward New England, the Upper Midwest, or South Florida.

可见性良好的位置因位置而异，如左下方所示。山际州定期享有100英里的能见度。在美国东部，一年中的能见度平均约为30到50英里，而夏季则为20到40英里。在俄亥俄州和田纳西州的山谷，能见度通常最差，随着您朝新英格兰，中西部上层或南佛罗里达的方向前进，可见度会提高。

发布于 2020-03-22 12:25:14 编辑于 2020-03-22 12:41:55

