# 专业深空天体目录 简注版

索引来源：http://www.messier.seds.org/xtra/supp/cats.html

注：经过了部分译注与增删，补充了一些常见的知识内容。这里列出的只是专业的深空天体表，关于业余的深空天体表我会开另外一篇文章圈点。

## 通用

  *  **Messier** : Charles Messier.Pub 1774-1784. 第一个更可靠，更全面的深空天体目录，对于业余爱好者来说是必看的。
  *  **NGC** : J.L.E. Dreyer.Pub 1888. New General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars. 当时已知的所有深空天体的综合列表，包括赫歇尔和罗塞勋爵的目录
  *  **IC** : J.L.E. Dreyer. Pub 1895 (Index I), 1907 (Index II). 许多摄影对象为摄影发现。

不常见的通用列表:

  * Bode: Johann Elert Bode's "Complete Catalog of Nebulous Stars and Star Clusters", Astronomisches Jahrbuch for 1779, Berlin (1977).  

  * Dun, Delta: Dunlop James Dunlop's (1795-1848) historic catalog of southern deep sky objects. James Dunlop, 1828. A catalogue of nebulae and clusters of stars in the southern hemisphere, observed at Paramatta in New South Wales, by James Dunlop, Esq. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, Vol. 118, pp. 113-151. Catalog of 629 positions of nebulous objects. Many of them were only badly determined, though.  

  * GC: General Catalogue  

John Herschel's famous General Catalogue of nonstellar objects: Catalogue of
Nebulae and Clusters of Stars.

  * H: (William) Herschel

 **William Herschel's catalog of 2500 deep sky objects** , published in the
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society: First catalog of 1,000
nebulous objects (1786), second catalog of a second 1,000 nebulous objects
(1789), and third catalog of 500 nebulous objects. Classified in 8 subclasses,
and numbered in the order of discovery for each subclass (e.g., H I.215 or H
1.215, H II.909 or H 2.909, H VIII.88 or H 8.88; older notations were like H
215-I or H 215^I or I H 215).

  * h: (John) Herschel John Herschel's catalog, 2 parts 1833 (northern objects) and 1847 (southern): 1. Observations of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars, made at Slough, with a Twenty-feet Reflector, between the years 1825 and 1833. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, Vol. 123, p. 359--505, 1833. 2307 objects. 2. Results of Astronomical Observations made during the years 1834, 5, 6, 7, 8 at the Cape of Good Hope, being a completion of a telescopic survey of the whole surface of the visible heavens commenced in 1825. Smith, Elder & Co., London. The 1713 entries in this catalog were numbered in continuation of John Herschel's 1833 catalog, and are normally referred as h 2308 -- h 4021.
  * Lac: Lacaille Nicholas Louis de la Caille (1713-62). Sur les etoiles nebuleuses du ciel Austral (On the Nebulous Stars of the Southern Sky). Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Sciences in Paris, 1755. The reprint version appended to Messier's catalog is available online.

## 超新星遗迹

 **G** : Galactic Supernova Remnants.[A Catalogue of Galactic Supernova
Remnants](http://www.mrao.cam.ac.uk/surveys/snrs/) (2000 August version). 又名
**SNR G** ，数据来源于射电天文台.

## 行星状星云

  *  **PK** : Perek-KohoutekPerek and Kohoutek. Catalog of Galactic Planetary Nebulae. 汇编了1964年在银河系中已知的所有行星状星云. PK是目录PK 1967的名称，格式为lll+bb.b，其中lll是银经，bb.b是银纬.   

  * **PN G** : the "Strasbourg-ESO Catalog of Galactic Planetary Nebulae". 比PK更大的行星状星云表，区别在于其行星状星云的名称系统遵循IAU委员会5（天文学命名法）的建议，其结构为：“ PN GlIl.l + bb.b”，其中PN表示“行星状星云”，G表示“星系坐标”，并且lll.l+bb.b分别是银河经度和纬度，被截断到小数点后一位。  

  * **Abell**  

George O. Abell, 1966. Globular Clusters and Planetary Nebulae Discovered on
the National Geographic Society-Palomar Observatory Sky Survey. 这个表的编号经常使用
**A66** 作为索引.

  *  _ARO_ : Algonquin Radio Observatory. L.A. Higgs, 1971.  

  * _He2_ :  

Karl G. Henize, 1967. Observations of Southern Planetary Nebulae.

  * A large number of more Planetary Nebulae catalogs is listed in the Appendix A of S.J. Hynes, _Planetary Nebulae_ (1991), page 251-256.

## 弥散星云

  *  **Ced** : Cederblad

S. Cederblad, 1946. Catalog of Bright Diffuse Galactic Nebulae.

  *  **DWB** : 

H.R. Dickel, H.J. Wendker, J.H. Bieritz, 1969. 这个表列出了天鹅座X区域的光学可见电离氢区(HII
regions).

  *  _GN_ : Galactic Nebula

Anonymous Galactic Nebula from the "Atlas of Galactic Nebulae" by T. Neckel
and H. Vehrenberg

  *  _Gum_

C.S. Gum. _A Survey of Southern H II Regions_.

  *  **LBN** : Lynds, Catalogue of Bright Nebulae

B.T. Lynds, 1965. Catalogue of Bright Nebulae. 包含发射和反射星云。通常仅在缺少Sh2或vdB编号时才引用。

  *  _Mi, M1_ : Minkowski

Rudolph Minkowski, 1946. New Emission Nebulae.

  *  **RCW** : Rodgers, Campbell, Whiteoak.

Rodgers, Campbell, Whiteoak, 1960. A Catalogue of H Alpha-Emission Regions in
the Southern Milky Way.

  *  **Sh2** : Sharpless

S. Sharpless, 1959. A Catalogue of H II Regions. 银河系发射星云的完整目录。

  *  **vdB** : van den Bergh

S. van den Bergh, 1966. A Study of Reflection Nebulae. 银河系反射星云的完整目录。

## 暗星云

  *  **B** : Barnard

E.E. Barnard, 1927. _Catalogue of 349 Dark Objects in the Sky_.

E.E. Barnard, 1919. On the dark markings of the sky, with a catalogue of 182
such objects.

  * **LDN** : Lynds, Catalogue of Dark Nebulae

B.T. Lynds. _Catalogue of Dark Nebulae_. 银河系暗星云的完整目录.

## 疏散星团

  * A: Antalova  

  * Av-Hunter: Aveni-Hunter  

  * Aveni-Hunter, one open cluster  

  * Bar, Bark: Barkhatova Barkhatova, K.A., 1958. Clusters in the region of the North America Nebula.  

  * Bas: Basel Basel astronomical institute. Basel 1-20. 以三种颜色观察到的银河星团的目录  

  * Be: Berkeley Lynga 1979, see C, gives 90 clusters numbered between 1 and 104.  

  * Bi, Biur: Biurkan  

Biurakan observatory. 13 clusters.

  * Blanco  

  * Bo: Bochum  

  * **Cr** : Collinder Per Collinder (1890 - Dec 6, 1974), On structured properties of open galactic clusters and their spatial distribution. Catalogue of 471 open clusters, identified on the Franklin-Adams charts, the NGC catalog, and the catalogs of Bailey, Melotte, Raab, Shapley, Trumpler, and others.  

  * Cz: Czernik  

  * Do: Dolidze  

  * DoDz: Dolidze/Dzimselejsvili  

  * Fr: Frolov  

  * Graff Graff 1 = IC 4756 (Graff's Cluster).  

  * Grasdalen  

  * Haf: Hafner  

  * H: Harvard  

  * Iskudarian  

  * K: King Ivan R. King. 27 open clusters. King 1-27.  

  * Latysev I.N. Latysev. 2 open clusters.  

  * Lund G. Lynga, 1987. Catalogue of Open Cluster Data.  

  * Lynga G. Lynga, 1964.  

  * Mrk: Markarian B.E. Markarian, 1951.  

  * Mayer  

  * **Mel** : Melotte Philibert Jacques Melotte (Jan 29, 1880 - Mar 30, 1961), 1915. 在Franklin-Adams图表板上显示的星团目录.  

  * Pi: Pismis Paris Pismis , Nuevos cumulos estelares en regiones del sur, Bol.  

  * Raab S. Raab, 1922. A reasearch on open clusters.   

  * Ro: Roslund Curt Roslund, Remarks on Some New and Some Known Galactic Clusters.  

  * **Ru** : Ruprecht J. Ruprecht, 1966. Classification of open star clusters.  

  * Ste: Stephenson  

  * St: Stock Jürgen Stock  

  * Tom: Tombaugh Clyde Tombaugh's Small List of Open Clusters.  

  * **Tr** : Trümpler R.J. Trumpler, 1930. Preliminary results on the distances, dimensions and space distribution of open star clusters.  

  * Up: Upgren  

  * vdB: van den Bergh-Waterloo  

  * vdB-Ha: van den Bergh-Hagen, sometimes BH Van den Bergh, S. and Hagen, G. L., 1975. Uniform survey of clusters in the Southern Milky Way.  

## 球状星团

  *  **Arp**

Halton A. Arp. _Globular Clusters in the Galaxy_. In: _Galactic Structure_ ,
ed.

  *  **AM** : Arp-Madore

Barry F. Madore and Halton C. Arp. 4 faint clusters, 1 open, 2 Milky Way
globulars and 1 SMC cluster.

  *  _BH_ : van den Bergh-Hagen

See open clusters, **vdB-Ha**. Two of these clusters actually are globular
clusters: BH 176 and BH 229 (= HP 1).

  *  _Djorg_ :

S. Djorgovski. Discovery of three obscured globular clusters.

  *  _E_ :

A. Lauberts. Three distant stellar clusters found on ESO blue survey plates.

  *  **ESO** :

A. Lauberts. ESO/Uppsala survey of the ESO(B) atlas. Among the more than
18,000 objects are 85 globular clusters.

  *  _HP_ : Haute Provence

5 globular clusters found at the Haute Provence Observatory. HP 1 is also BH
229 (vdB-Ha 229), HP 2,3,4,5 are also Terzan 1,2,4,6.

  *  **Pal** : [Palomar](http://www.astronomy-mall.com/Adventures.In.Deep.Space/palglob.htm) (from Adventures in Deep Space)

15 very faint globular clusters discovered within the POSS (Palomar
Observatory Sky Survey).

  *  **Ter** : [Terzan](http://www.astronomy-mall.com/Adventures.In.Deep.Space/obscure.htm#terzan) (from Adventures in Deep Space)

11 globulars discovered by Agop Terzan (France) in the infrared; mostly
heavily obscured and situated near the Galactic Center. - **Ton** :
Tonantzintla

Two globulars found at the Tonantzintla observatory. Ton 1 is NGC 6380, Ton 2
is also Pismis 26.

  *  **UKS** : UK Schmidt

Three globular clusters were cataloged under UKS designations.

## 星系

  *  **Arp**

Halton Arp, _Atlas of Peculiar Galaxies_. 特殊星系目录.

  *  **AM** : Arp-Madore

Halton C. Arp, Barry F. Madore. _A Catalogue of Southern Peculiar Galaxies and
Associations: Positions and Descriptions_ (Vol 1), _Selected Photographs_ (Vol
2).

  *  **DDO** : David Dunlop Observatory

Sidney van den Bergh. Luminosity Classifications of Dwarf Galaxies.

  *  **GR** : Gibson Reaves

Gibson Reaves. Dwarf Galaxies in the Virgo Cluster.

  *  **Holm** : Holmberg

Nine galaxies, Holmberg I-IX. Holmberg I, II, III and IX are in M 81 region.
Holmberg IV, V are in M 101 region.

  * **Mrk** : Markarian

B.E. Markarian, V.A Lipovetskii, J.A. Stepanian, L.K. Erastova, A.I.
Shapovalova, Soobscheniya Spetsialnoi Astrofizicheskoi Observatorii 62, 5
(1989). Catalog of some 1515 Galaxies.

  *  **MCG** : Morphological Catalogue of Galaxies

Vorontsov-Velyaminov and Arhipova. Contains 29,000 objects. Also referred to
as VV.

  *  **PGC** : Principal Galaxies Catalogue

G. Paturel, P. Fouque, L. Botinelli and L. Gougenheim of the Observatoire de
Lyon, France, 1989 and 1995. An extragalactic database. I - The Catalogue of
Principal Galaxies. Also: Catalogue of Principal Galaxies (PGC).

  * **UGC** : Uppsala General Catalogue of Galaxies

P.N. Nilson, Uppsala, 1973. Contains 12921 objects.

  *  **UGC-A** , **UA** : Catalogue of Selected Non-UGC Galaxies

P.N. Nilson, Uppsala, 1974.

  *  **VV** : Vorontsov-Velyaminov

= MCG

  *  **1Z** to **7Z** : Zwicky

Fritz Zwicky's compact systems

Other important catalogs of galaxies, which are however not normally quoted,
include

  *  **RC3** : Third Reference Catalogue of Bright Galaxies

## 星系群

  *  **Abell**

G.O. Abell. _The Distribution of Rich Clusters of Galaxies_. 这个富星系团目录编号经常写作
**ACO**.

  *  **RCG** : Catalogue of Rich Clusters of Galaxies
  * HCG : Hickson's Compact groups of Galaxies. 致密星系群目录.

## 双星

  *  **ADS** : Aitken, New General Catalog of Double Stars

R.G. Aitken. _New General Catalogue of Double Stars Within 120 deg of the
North Pole_. Washington, DC, 1932; Carnegie Inst.

  *  **Beta** , **BDS** : Burnham

S.W. Burnham. _A General Catalogue of Double Stars Within 121 deg of the North
Pole_. Washington, DC, 1906; Carnegie Inst.

  *  **Sigma** : F.G.W. Struve  

  * **O Sigma** : Otto Struve  

  * **Win** , **WNC** , **Winnecke**.  

The Winnecke Catalog of seven double stars, included in a paper of A. Winnecke
([Winnecke
1869](http://www.messier.seds.org/xtra/supp/cats.html#winnecke1869)).
Important only as it contains [M40](http://www.messier.seds.org/m/m040.html).
[Available online](http://www.messier.seds.org/xtra/supp/wnc.html).

## Reference

编制参考:

basic: <http://www.messier.seds.org/xtra/supp/cats.html>

索引信息扩展:

PN G: <https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/W3Browse/nebula-catalog/plnebulae.html>

<https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/W3Browse/all/>

Nebulae: https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/W3Browse/nebula-catalog

Gal: <https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/W3Browse/galaxy-catalog>

<https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/W3Browse/star-catalog/>

<https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/W3Browse/catalog/>

<https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/W3Browse/master-catalog>

<https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/W3Browse/radio-catalog>

<https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/W3Browse/xmm-newton/>

<https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/W3Browse/uhuru/>

<https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/W3Browse/all/openclust.html>

<https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/W3Browse/all/globclust.html>

发布于 2020-02-16 21:12:51

